.TH a2crd l "December 1992" "Utilities"
.SH NAME
a2crd \- attempts the conversion of lyrics file into chord input
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B a2crd
[ options...] [ filename... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I a2crd
reads the lyrics of one songs from a file, and attempts to produce
a output suitable for 
.I chord.
Chord names can appear above or below
the lyrics.
.I a2crd
will embed those names into the lyrics.

The FAQ list of alt.guitar documents the way a ascii file should look,
but this format is not recognized by everyone, or fully enforced. Thus,
it is impossible to modify 
.I chord
itself to read *any* type of ascii input and produce good
result. 
.I a2crd 
tries its best to to do the tedious conversion job.

.I a2crd
attempts to recognize mail/news headers, and comments them out.
It preserves as is any line starting with a '{', which would indicates a
.I chord
command. It also preserves any lines starting with a '#'.

.I a2crd
prepends to the output the content of a file
called $HOME/.a2crdsig, if it exists.

The first line that is not a comment is assumed to be the title of the
song. The nest lines until a blank one are assumed to be sub-titles.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP 8 
.B \-r \fIratio\fR
Sets the threshold for chord line recognition. a2crd looks at every
line. If the ratio ( space_characters / (non-space_characters) is
greater than \fIratio\fR, the line will be recognized as a chord line,
and its content will be merge with the next available text line. The
\fIratio\fR has a initial value of 1. It is defined as a floating precision
value.
.TP 8
.B \-D
Prints debugging information. For programmers only.
.TP 8
.B \-o \fIfilename\fB
Sends output to \fIfilename\fB
.TP 8
.SH See Also
chord(l)
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright 1992 by Martin Leclerc and Mario Dorion
.SH AUTHORS
Martin Leclerc
(martin.leclerc@canada.sun.com)
